Document SSR and related mechanisms in place (#114)
front-commerce/developers.front-commerce.com: source/docs/advanced/theme/server-side-rendering.md

---
id: server-side-rendering
title: Server Side Rendering (SSR)
---

> Front-Commerce uses <abbr title="Server Side Rendering">SSR</abbr> (opposed to <abbr title="Client Side Rendering">CSR</abbr>) to improve <abbr title="Search Engine Optimization">SEO</abbr> and <abbr title="User experience">UX</abbr> by serving <abbr title="Hypertext Markup Language">HTML</abbr> pages to users on their first hit to the server. You can read [A typical request in Front-Commerce](/docs/concepts/architecture-overview.html#A-typical-request-in-Front-Commerce) to get a better understanding of this process.

Reviewer: Acronym party! 🤸

      setPosition(position.coords.latitude, position.coords.longitude);
    });
  }
}
```

## `branchServerClient` at the rescue!

There may be situations were displaying a totally different component during the server rendering might be relevant.

For instance, instead of displaying a map centered on the user geolocation it might be better to render a placeholder (page skeleton) on the server and load the map with additional data during <abbr title="Client Side Rendering">CSR</abbr>. Another use case would be to avoid an unnecessary overhead by not rendering some components during SSR: a social media feed may not make sense on the server.

Front-Commerce provides a `branchServerClient` <abbr title="Higher Order Component">HOC</abbr> that allow you to conditionally render a component or another one on server and client side.

Example:

```js
import branchServerClient from "web/core/branchServerClient";

const MyClientSideComponent => props => <div>Hi!</div>;

export default branchServerClient(
  () => () => null, // do not render anything during SSR
  BaseComponent => BaseComponent // render the base component on the client
)(MyClientSideComponent);

> ```

Reviewer: Not sure if it's worth mentioning this tip here but I know it helped some of our integrators:

To memorize which element renders on the server and which one renders on the client, refer to the method name: `branchServerClient`, thus the first parameter is for the server and the second one is for the client.

If you only need to know the rendering context, you can use Front-Commerce's `withIsServer` HOC to have an `isServer` prop injected in your component.

Example:

```js
import { withIsServer } from "web/core/branchServerClient";

const MyIsomorphicComponent => props => <div>
  My latest render occured on the {props.isServer ? "server" : "client" }.
</div>;

export default withIsServer()(MyIsomorphicComponent);
```

<blockquote class="note">
  **ProTip™:** in order to reduce the amount of Javascript sent to users, we've found that code using `branchServerClient()` are often good candidates to code splitting. You may consider using a `loadable()` component here. You can use [`DEBUG="front-commerce:webpack"`](/docs/reference/environment-variables.html#Debugging) to analyze your bundles and decide wether it would improve your application or not.
</blockquote>

> 

Reviewer: Should we mention the fact that the server part will always be rendered first before rendering the client? This stands even if the user is navigating client side.

Author: What are the pitfalls of this? I am not sure how to mention it here without making the whole page too cumbersome.

I'd appreciate a hand for this, to see how it could fit in the big picture. I suggest to add it in an upcoming PR after merging this one.

This behavior is leveraging [Front-Commerce's configuration system](/docs/advanced/server/configurations.html) to provide information about the device. Each `req.config` will contain a `device` key with the following information that you can use to if needed:

```js
// req.config.device
{
  // User-Agent detection is memoized for each header value for this amount of time
  memoizationMaxAge: ONE_MINUTE_IN_MS,
  type: "phone", //  ["phone", "tablet", "pc", "tv", "bot"]
  viewportWidthInPx: 360
}
```

If you want to tweak this behavior, we invite you to browse the [`deviceConfigProvider`](https://gitlab.com/front-commerce/front-commerce/-/blob/master/src/server/express/ssr/deviceConfigProvider.js) for implementation details and [contact us](mailto:contact@front-commerce.com) if you think of improvements.

## SSR Fallback when things go wrong

<blockquote class="feature--new">
  _This feature has been added in version `2.0.0-rc.0`_
</blockquote>

> During development you might face some SSR errors due to syntax errors or [browser API usage](/docs/advanced/theme/server-side-rendering.html#There-is-no-window-on-the-server). By default in dev mode, Front-Commerce provides an error page that makes the mistake obvious to allow you to fix it as early as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During SSR you might face some errors (syntax errors, [browser API usage](/docs/advanced/theme/server-side-rendering.html#There-is-no-window-on-the-server), render errors, etc.). By default in dev mode, Front-Commerce provides an error page that makes the mistake obvious to allow you to fix it as early as possible.
```
